CO3354 Introduction to natural language processing
1.3 Learning outcomes
On successful completion of this course, including recommended readings, exercises
and activities, you should be able to:
1. utilise and explain the function of software tools such as corpus readers,
stemmers, taggers and parsers
2. explain the difference between regular and context-free grammars and deﬁne
formal grammars for fragments of a natural language
3. critically appraise existing Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications such
as chatbots and translation systems
4. describe some applications of statistical techniques to natural language analysis,
such as classiﬁcation and probabilistic parsing.
Each main chapter contains a list of learning outcomes speciﬁc to that chapter at the
beginning, as well as a summary at the end of the chapter.
1.4 Reading list and other learning resources
This is a list of textbooks and other resources which will be useful for all or most
parts of the course. Additional readings will be given at the start of each chapter. See
the bibliography for a full list of books and articles referred to, including all ISBNs.
In some cases several different books will be listed: you are not expected to read all
of them, rather the intention is to give you some alternatives in case particular texts
are hard to obtain.
Essential reading
Bird, Klein, and Loper (2009): Natural Language Processing with Python . The full
text including diagrams is freely available online at http://nltk.org/book (last
visited 13th April 2013). The main textbook for this course, Natural Language
Processing with Python is the outcome of a project extending over several years
to develop the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK), which is a set of tools and
resources for teaching computational linguistics. The NLTK comprises a suite of
software modules written in Python and a collection of corpora and other
resources. See section 1.5 below for advice on installing the NLTK and other
software packages.
In the course of working through this text you will gain some experience and
familiarity with the Python language, though you will not be expected to
produce substantial original code as part of the learning outcomes of the course.
Recommended reading
Pinker (2007). The Language Instinct . This book is aimed at non-specialists and
deals with many psychological and cultural aspects of language. Chapter 4 is
particularly relevant to this course as it provides a clear and accessible
presentation of two standard techniques for modelling linguistic structure:
ﬁnite-state machines and context-free grammars (though Pinker does not in fact
use these terms, as we will see in Chapter 2 of the subject guide).
6Reading list and other learning resources
Jurafsky and Martin (2009): Speech and Language Processing , second edition.
Currently the deﬁnitive introductory textbook in this ﬁeld, covering the major
topics in a way which combines theoretical issues with presentations of key
technologies, formalisms and mathematical techniques. Much of this book goes
beyond what you will need to pass this course, but it is always worth turning to
if you’re looking for a more in-depth discussion of any particular topics.
Perkins (2010): Python Text Processing with NLTK 2.0 Cookbook . This book will be
suitable for students who want to get more practice in applying Python
programming to natural language processing. Perkins explains several
techniques and algorithms in more technical detail than Bird et al. (2009) and
provides a variety of worked examples and code snippets.
Segaran (2007) Programming Collective Intelligence . This highly readable and
informative text includes tutorial material on machine learning techniques using
the Python language.
Additional reading
Russell and Norvig (2010) Artiﬁcial Intelligence: a modern approach , third edition.
This book is currently regarded as the deﬁnitive textbook in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, and includes useful material on natural language processing as well
as on machine learning, which has many applications in NLP.
Mitkov (2003) The Oxford Handbook of Computational Linguistics . Edited by Ruslan
Mitkov. A collection of short articles on major topics in the ﬁeld, contributed by
acknowledged experts in their respective disciplines.
Partee et al. (1990) Mathematical Methods in Linguistics . A classic text, whose
contents indicate how much the ﬁeld has changed since its publication. A book
with such a title nowadays would be expected to include substantial coverage of
statistics, probability and information theory, but this text is devoted exclusively
to discrete mathematics including set theory, formal logic, algebra and automata.
These topics are particularly applicable to the content of Chapters 2 and 6.
Websites
Introductory/Reference The Internet Grammar of English is a clear and informative
introductory guide to English grammar which also serves as a tutorial in
grammatical terminology and concepts. The site is hosted by the Survey of
English Usage at University College London
(http://www.ucl.ac.uk/internet-grammar/home.htm, last visited 27th May
2013).
Hands-on corpus analysis
BNCWeb is a web-based interface to the British National Corpus hosted at Lancaster
University which supports a variety of online queries for corpus analysis
(http://bncweb.info/; last visited 27th May 2013).
The Bank of English forms part of the Collins Corpus, developed by Collins
Dictionaries and the University of Birmingham. Used as a basis for Collins
Advanced Learner’s Dictionary, grammars and various tutorial materials for
learners of English. Limited online access at
http://www.collinslanguage.com/wordbanks; (last visited 27th May 2013).
Journals and conferences
Computational Linguistics is the leading journal in this ﬁeld and is freely available at
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/loi/coli (last visited 27th May 2013).
Conference Proceedings are often freely downloadable and many of these are
hosted by the ACL Anthology at http://aclweb.org/anthology-new/ (last visited
27th May 2013).
7